This video is brought to you by policy genius.
If you have family members who depends on your income, you need life insurance.
That's where policy genius comes in more on images to bits.
His name is synonymous with AAT corruption for 20 years further.
And Marco ruled the Philippines first as its democratically elected president.
Then as its iron fisted dictator at home,
his regime was defined by its authoritarianism.
During the years of Marshall law,
it estimated around 3000 political prisoners were murdered.
While another 40,000 were tortured to the rest of the world. Though,
there was one major theme of the mark OSS corruption corruption on a scale.
So eye watering history has rarely seen anything like it.
There's absolute ruler of his country,
Marcus and his wife and Mel had plundered the state treasury using public funds
to buy everything from luxury villas to synthesize diamonds to a thousand pairs
of designer shoes, all told they thought to have stolen
$5 billion from the Philippines at a time when millions were going hungry and
underfunded hospitals couldn't afford anesthetic today biographics is
investigating the story of how one man managed to turn an entire nation into his
personal piggy bank.
In years, an Marco like to boast about his pre presidential achievements,
how it won more medals than any other gorilla fighter resisting the Japanese,
how he had been the greatest marksman in the history of the ROTC,
but there was one part of his CV.
The dictator had always kept quiet that in addition to his expensive education
and sparkling law career, he was also a convicted murderer. Third in and,
and Manuel ARA. Marcos was born on September the 11th,
1917 in ICOT Norte, northerly province known for its tobacco plantations.
Wildlife of many in the area was hard.
The future dictator was brought up in relative comfort.
His mother came from a land owning family while his father Maria was a local
politician. At least that's the official story decades.
There have been rumors that the boy's godfather,
a judge named th an qu was his real dad.
And these rumors were fueled by the money qu lavished on the family,
regardless of his true heritage though,
Marco always stood loyally by the man that he called father.
It was a trait that would soon Lando in some serious hot water. In 1925,
Maria won election to the house of representatives of the Philippines.
Then a part of the insular government. At the time,
the Philippines was a us colony swiped from Spain at the end of the Spanish
American war, but with its own legislature for internal matters,
since it was based in Manila,
the family moved to the capital that Marco settled into the privileged life of a
politician's son. He attended a good school,
took up hobbies like boxing and shooting. Even when Maria lost his seat in 1932,
the now teenage boy stayed on studying law at the university of the Philippines
there as part of the reserve officer's training Corps or R OTC,
he became one of the country's star marksman. And yes,
that fact is going to be significant in 1935,
the us altered the colony status grounding further autonomy. Importantly,
this meant the creation of a new national assembly.
The assembly that Mariano was determined to be a part of that September Marcus's
dad went up against ju Nuen for their district seat to the family's shark.
Mariano lost.
No Anderson's supported are celebrated by having the Marcus family name engraved
on a coffin that they dragged through the streets,
but it wouldn't be Mariano who needed that wooden box.
Just two days later on September the 20th Nison was brushing his teeth at home.
When he was shot through the window and killed with a single 22 caliber bullet,
it was the sort of assassination.
Only a trained marksman could have pulled off person who spent hours each
day practicing on the range.
A person like Ferna Marco arrested Anson's murder.
Marcos was convicted in 1939 handed a sentence of 10 to 17 years while in jail,
he kept up his law study soon, acing the bar exam.
When he came time for the Supreme court to hear his appeal,
Marcos decided to represen himself.
It was a decision that would make his career. In course,
Marcos blew everyone away with his speaking skills,
his charisma and his grasp of legal knowledge. At one point he admitted,
he knew the law so well that he could recite the constitution backwards.
That proceeded to do just that stunt,
which the reporters ate up by the time the court ruled in October, 1940,
they were eager to own return his conviction,
but not because they thought he was innocent as justice.
Jose B Laurel argued the Commonwealth would need such brilliant young men once
freed from American rule. The case turns Marcus into a celebrity and Manila,
a hero to the sort of clients that he now represented at his dad's law firm.
But the brilliant young man wasn't finished yet within 25 years,
he'd have gone on from promising kin to leader of his country
In the ends Marcus' work in Mariano's law firm lasted barely a year on December
the eighth, 1941,
Japan invaded the Philippines opening a whole new front in world war II.
What happened next? Depends on. He talked to according to his supporters,
Marcus' wartime exploits were basically Asian Rambo captured by the
Japanese.
He survived the infamous Baton death Mount only to be tortured at camp Donnell.
One of the Pacifics deadliest pow camps, but rather than succumb Marcus escaped,
fleeing into the mountains from where he proceeded to rain held down on the
occupy long army as one of the highest decorated gorilla pointers in the
Philippines,
Marcos coordinated with us intelligence to help America recapture the islands.
Although his father was executed by the Japanese,
the young lawyer continued to fight earning a reputation.
So mythic the peasants believed he could deflect bullets or vanish into smoke.
This version of the story ends like the final scenes of a new hope with uncle
Sam's layer greatly showering medals down onto Marcus'
hunky hand solo,
but there is another version of version that claims Marco did none of this,
that the us has no record of ever rewarding him, any medals,
and that Marco spend the war not fighting,
but making a killing on the black market in this version.
Even Mariano's death is different executed for collaborating with the Japanese
in the ends though, it doesn't really matter which one of these was true.
Marco simply used the full force of his charisma to make everyone believe the
version most flattering to him.
The result was a nation that felt eternally in his death in 1946,
just after the us granted the Philippines full independence.
Marco became a special assistant to the new president,
opening up endless networking opportunities. At the same time,
he relaunched his career as a lawyer now trading on his war hero reputation to
attract big clients. But all this was really just a stepping stone,
a single step forward on the past Virgin ends.
Marcos had already laid out for himself the path to absolute power.
We can see this from the moment he lodged his political career in 1949,
running on a liberal party ticket for the lower house.
Marco told voters in his native area.
If you are electing me just to get my services for the pits of 7,500
paces a year, don't vote for me at all. This is only a first step.
Elect me a Congressman now,
and I pledge you an <inaudible> presidents in 20 years. In fact,
it would take even less time than that elected in no small part due to his war
record. Marco became a fixture on Manila's political scene. He was young,
wealthy, a staunch reformer, and a powerful lawyer.
Now all he needed was a wife worthy of his ambition. In 1954,
Marco met Imelda Romeu EZ,
miss Manila winner from an obscenely well connected family.
After a courtship of just 11 days,
they married Marco gifted as bride and 11 Kara diamond,
one carrot for each day that did known her from that day fourth Imelda Marcos
would be infamous in her own, right,
but we'll save her story for a potential future video for now.
All we'll do is note that the couple soon had children,
two of whom daughter reme and son bong,
would become almost as notorious as their dad by 1963,
third and M Marco seemed to have it all. He was now president of the Senate,
one of the most powerful posts in the nation.
He was a darling of the trade unions, passionate advocate, land reform,
and one of the liberal parties, rising stars.
But even this couldn't sat the appetite of the ambitious boy from St. Norte,
not when he could still go higher,
not when Marcus could run for presidents.
See,
here's the problem with Marcus' plan to run for president on the liberal party
tickets, the liberal party already had a president,
but Marcos wasn't about to let a silly little thing like his whole party saying,
bro, seriously, our guys already in charge. Stop him from running in 1965,
he switched parties becoming the nominee for his former rivals the NA LEAs under
the slogan. This nation can be great. Again, sound for,
he went on to trounce the encumbered president winning nearly 52% of the vote.
And just like that,
Virgin and Marcus was the Philippines head honcho to be fair.
The writing had been on the wall from the moments that had won the national
least as nomination so far,
no post-independence president had managed to win a second term.
Little could anyone have known that Marcus would wind up serving as long as his
five predecessors combined at first,
the election of her Marcos didn't seem like a major historic shift in his first
time,
the new president did some predictable stuff like backing the us in the Vietnam
war and some controversial stuff like sending 2000 Pinot troops to help.
He also did some populous stuff like cracking down or corruption and some useful
stuff like repairing roads and sewage systems for anyone alive. At the time,
it would've felt less like the beginning of a dictatorship and more like,
well business. As usual, aside from the first couples ostentatious lifestyle,
people called them the Filipino Kennedys.
There was nothing to really mark Marco out from previous one town wonders until
that is he won his second term. Marcus' 1969.
Reelection hits political circles like a Thunderbolt in an era when no one got a
second term here was burden and Marco still enjoying the Goodwill of the people.
At least that's how the president's office spun it.
The opposition claim that Marcus had used intimidation and violence to get votes
that he had spent state funds on his campaign,
that he was already planning an illegal third term as 1970 dawned.
It was still just about possible to look at Marcus and see an ordinary
politician. One who played dirty,
but wasn't on a par with some Latin American autocrat,
sadly that illusion wouldn't survive the oncoming storm,
not today's the first quarter storm.
That course cyclone basically did for the Philippines.
What the Galveston hurricane did for Texas as Markos began.
His second term insane social current were swirling creating a highly volatile
cocktail.
There was brewing resentment at Filipino involvement in the Vietnam war,
a growing pushback against us. Imperialism upheaval on campuses.
Cripplingly low wages for the poor were causing problems as upcoming price hikes
out in rural areas of fledgling.
Communist insurgency was taking holes when Marco delivered his state of the
nation address on January the 27th, 1970,
it was the trigger for all of those resentments to finally explode on January
the 30th tsunami of protest descended on the president's Malang palace
determined to break sight protest just tried to scale the walls.
Guards open fired. Someone drove a truck at the front gates.
Eventually the demonstrators were driven back to Mendiola that the police
attacked killing five in the aftermath. Marcos declared the protests,
an attack on democracy that the storm did end across February and March middle
the streets boiled with rage.
There were running battles between police and students bar bombings,
reprisals by security for horses.
The us embassy had its lobby trashed strikes and mass protests paralyzed the
capital.
It was a how of rage that depending on your politics was either a necessary
release or a sign of the coming communists takeover.
The storm finally ebbed after March the 17th, but it didn't die.
The anger simply hid below the surface just bubbling away.
It seems now Marcos recognized this the long after the storm debated,
he went to the military and asked them to draw up hypothetical plans,
preparation for if the worst happened.
These plans were to implement martial law across the Philippines within no time
at all. They were going to move from the realm of hypothetical.
That of terrifying reality. Now for a lot of people,
there is no more terrifying reality than sudden death that leaves your family
destitute. That's why life insurance is so crucial.
And fortunately today's video is sponsored by policy genius. Look,
nobody likes to think about life insurance,
but the reality is that it's an important layer of protection for many families,
especially for single income households.
That's why policy genius and their award-winning policy options ranked number
one by Forbes, by the way,
are so crucial whether you've been putting off your purchase or just never
really thought about it. Policy genius is the team you want to check in with.
This is a third party marketplace that works for you,
not for the insurance companies.
So you can trust that their licensed experts are going to give you solid
unbiased advice. Life insurance premiums might seem like a financial drain,
but you could save $1,300 or more per year by using policy genius to
compare life insurance policies. If you're interested,
please do head to policy genius.com to get started.
And within minutes you can work out how much coverage you need and compare
personalized quotes to find your best price.
When you're ready to apply the policy genius team will handle the paperwork and
scheduling for free.
You could save 50% or more on life insurance by comparing quotes with policy
genius and getting covered.
Now locks in your rate as is over the course of a 10 or 20 year policy.
Those savings add up and best of all eligible applicants can get covered in a CS
one week. So policy genius.com to sign up. You'll be glad you did.
And let's get back to today's video
Reading about the months leading up to Marshall law today is like reading some
awful novel where the protagonists are pulled inexorably towards disaster.
Each chapter brings some new radical set, some new tragedy,
the most tragic of which may be the chapter titled Plaza Miranda in
August, 1971.
As the liberal party gathered there to unveil its newest candidates.
Someone threw two grenades onto the stage. The blasts ripped apart nine people,
including a young girl and left nearly a hundred with gruesome wounds.
Although the liberals blamed Marco, the president in Sioux,
the communist and surgeons were behind the deaths. Two days later,
he suspended theri of habeas Corpus mass arrests followed,
but the chaos was only just the beginning on March the 15th, 1972,
an Ince device exploded in Manila rather than a one off.
It was the start of a bombing spree across the capital's Metro area.
Over the next six months,
20 blasts skilled one person and injured 40 as disasters piled up Barco started
denouncing the opposition as communists.
He started claiming it soon need emergency powers to deal with the rising tide
of violence in the land. His rhetoric got so heated that popular law maker,
Ben NIGO, a queen Jr.
Better known as Nino claims in the Senate that had found evidence of a secret
plan to place Manila under martial law. Sadly,
that knowledge came too late for anyone to on September the 22nd government
minister, Juan Ponson relay was driving home.
When his car was ambushed by communists and sprayed with bullets,
it was a miracle that on relay managed to get away such a miracle. In fact,
and that most assumed the attack was staged still.
This was all the pretext that Marco needed. It's still a mystery. Exactly.
When proclamation number 1081 was signed implementing Marshall law.
Some say Marco signed it immediately after the Ambu,
Sean and relay others say that it secretly signed it the day before on September
the 21st, since 21 is visible by seven.
And Marco was famously obsessed with that number, regardless of the time though,
the results were the same as the clock tick midnight,
Senator Nemo keynote was arrested and he was just the first over the early hours
of September, the 23rd, 1972, some 400 journalists,
students and lawmakers were rounded up when the sun,
it was a country where radios were broadcasting, only static TVs were blank.
All airline traffic had been suspended and it was impossible to place an
international call. The silence continued until 3:00 PM fueling wild dreamers.
Finally,
it was broken by a te announcement that the president would make a speech at
7:00 PM that evening families gathered around their TV sets all day long.
Foreigners had been arrested and local intellectuals disappeared by now.
Everyone could guess what was going on and their suspicions were finally
confirmed at seven 15 on the nation screens,
president Marco solely informed viewers that Marshall law had been imposed was
the end of the Philippines. As a democracy over the coming months,
laws would be written,
removing checks and balances and concentrating power in the hands of Marcos.
70,000 would be jailed without trial for political crimes with another 35 to
40,000 torture. Over 3,250 people would be execut.
77% of whom had their corpses mutilated and dumped on the streets as a warning
to others. From this point on, there would be no justice in the land.
There would be no law. There would only be third and Marcos
At first. Incredible as it seems, martial law was pretty popular.
Things have been so chaotic that many welcomes the stability violence street
crime was reduced. Illegal guns were seized.
The military expanded to fight the communists nor did Marco just focus on law
and order.
When the new 1973 constitution was promulgated creating the post of prime
minister and giving it to mark O while still allowing him to be president.
The who'd just killed democracy,
gave a speech rallying against poverty in his nation.
But while the new society stated aim was to help the poor in reality,
Marco mainly just helped himself.
Successful companies were snatched from their owners,
turned over to Mel's family members use as their private piggy bags,
knowns crony capitalism.
This handling of assets over to friends would call was a gigantic economic
problem down the road,
but not before the first family made themselves filthy rich.
Over the years of Marshall law,
the Mars estimated to have stolen 5 billion from the public purse.
50 private villas were built with the couple ranging in luxury from extravagant
to would make the Salton of Brunai blush up in St.
North a palace was built,
designed to rival the president's official Mahan and residents in a elder's home
of laid the couple commissions, a 13 bedroom Villa,
each room decorated with grands Fresco's depicting scenes from elder's life in
tacky detail that children too reaped crony capitalism's rewards IMY and bong
were sent abroad to expensive schools with Emmy being gifted an entire 18th
century country estate to live in while studying Princeton, bong,
meanwhile arranged to have the military evict 120 poor Fisher families from an
island.
And just so it could be filled with exotic animals and turned into his private
hunting ground.
This was an era when around or million Filipino children were so poor that they
couldn't even afford school. Yet.
Here was a meld using the state budget to buy a thousand pairs of designer shoes
and literal suitcases stuffed full of jewels,
not the Marcos didn't reinvest at least some of his plundered loot in Manila,
huge sums of misappropriated cash,
where used to build world class specialized hospitals.
Many of these came out almost like hotels with things like upright pianos to
entertain patients. The trouble was these specialists centers targeted,
only diseases that Marco was interested in or which were fashionable to treat,
which is how Manila wounds up with an expensive lung center that saw a handful
of patients every year, while across the city, much more needed.
Tuberculosis hospitals were so starved of cash that patients were forced to
share beds. Still.
The regime did at least bring in land reform laws that allowed some peasants to
own their own small holdings for the first time.
Yet even this was overshadowed by a drop in real wages and an economy that soon
began to sag beneath the weight of the first couples, cronies, mismanaging,
multiple companies,
but perhaps the most damning facts is that the dictatorship failed on its terms.
Marshall law was justified as a way of fighting the fledgling communist
insurgency by the 1980s though, that insurgency hadn't just grown.
It had been joined by a Muslim separatist rebellion in the south. In fact,
the only thing the death of democracy seemed to have achieved was making further
and Marko filthy rich. Unfortunately for the dictator,
it wouldn't be long before the rest of the population realized what,
what a crappy deal. This actually was
On August the 21st, 1983,
Nino Aquino stepped down off the plane at Manila airport.
Certain that his time had come.
It was now a decade since it'd been arrested by Marcus' goons,
a decade in which it end endured imprisonment,
a suspended death sentence and eventual exile.
Now with the economy in shambles and rumors swirling about the dictators health,
the former Senator had returned to the Philippines to fight the democracy on his
own turf. Sadly,
he'd never get the chance as meningo Aquino stepped off the plane,
a gunshot rang out the senators had jerked back blood splatted.
It was the last assassination of the Marco era,
a another in a long line of bodies.
But this time murder would've consequences by the time of Nino's death,
Marcus' grip on powers loosening after an intense campaign by Catholic leaders,
Marshall law had been lifted in 1981 ahead of a visit by the Pope.
But Marco had refused to step down sure that his international bag as would
continue to support him as they always had with the assassination of Nino
though, things were are about to change. Now. So far in this video call,
Sam has been kind of hovering in the backgrounds like a star Spangled ghost ever
since the days of Lin B Johnson,
Washington had poured money into keeping the Marco regime of flowed.
Certain he was a bull work against communism,
but with a keynote dead and millions protesting,
uncle Sam suddenly began to wonder why he was wasting his time on this tin pot
tyrant. When, whether this go back to Marcus,
he decided to act to show his foreign benefactor that his people still loved
him. In 1985,
the dictator calls an early election fully intended to take the results and rub
them in Ronald Reagan's face. Instead,
Marcus wound up pressing the self destruct button on his own career.
The oppositions candidate was Nino's widow, the popular Corra on Aquino.
In fact,
she was so popular that when the official results showed a Marcus landslide,
people refused to believe them.
They attended Coron victory rally in their millions,
heated her call to start a campaign of civil obedience. In the end,
the campaign would take barely two weeks to achieve its goal on February the
22nd, 1986 Marcus' old ally,
Juan Ponson relay abruptly threw his lot in with cor on declaring that the
ambush on his car that had triggered the Marshall law had been staged on relay,
joins the army deputy chief of staff and calling for a co before barricading
himself in a military base. When the army was sent to retake it,
Filipinos poured into streets, forming a vast human shields,
unable to crush the trader without killing thousands, Marcos retreated.
It was effectively the end of his dictatorship by February the 25th protests
have paralyzed the country sensing which way the wind was blowing.
The Americans withdrew their support for Marco.
The dictator was told that he could accept Uson evacuation and exile.
Lord take his chances just hours earlier,
Marcus delivered a speech vowing to remain in power for another six years. Now,
he was forced to swallow his pride and accept the offer that same night,
the NAX president elder and their kids were airlifted out Manila.
They took with the millions of dollars en Lood goods,
final screw you to their countrymen,
but it would be the last wound Marcos would ever inflict on the Philippines.
Virgin Marco died three years later in exile in Hawaii on September the 28th,
1989. At the moment of his death,
he was facing federal charges of racketeering back home. His name was mud tar,
not just buying the assassination and revolution,
but by revelations of all the money that he and ADA pelt,
it was a deserved one which doubtless left the former Dick to feeling extremely
embedded. Yes, it wasn't quite the end today. Some 30 years after his death.
Third end, Marco is having an unlikely rehabilitation.
Karen Philippine president Rodrigo Duerte has openly embraced the strong man's
memory in 2016, even allowed Marco to be buried in the cemetery of heroes.
The Philippines equivalent of Arlington in elder is still alive and still adored
by millions. Emmy is a Senator while in 2016,
bong came within a he breadth of winning the vice presidency. Meanwhile,
the new generation born after the return of democracy are beginning to express
nostalgia for Marshall law for a time when so many believe the streets were
safe and order reigned it's remark,
or Postmus comeback for a dictator deposed in a revolution,
especially one. So flagrantly corrupt,
but then that's just Virgin and mark us all over throughout his life.
This was a man blessed with the devil's LA someone who managed to literally get
away with murder with war profiteering, with crushing descent for two decades,
wherever he is now up in heaven or in the depths of hell.
There's no doubt he's looking down on his recent rehabilitation and laughing.
So I really hope he found that video. Interesting. If he,
these do hit that thumbs up button below, don't forget to subscribe also,
thanks to our fantastic sponsor policy genius link below.
And thank you for watching.